---
layout: page
title: "About"
description: "Biography and information"
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Bio
====

Hi there! I'm a Canadian software developer working for Google. On the
job I write iOS code for Google Fiber TV, but I'm interested in a
variety of different areas of computer science, and love learning new
things. I have a big interest in software security and low-level systems
programming.

I graduated from the University of Calgary in 2016 (Bachelors of
Science, Honours, Computer Science). While there I was a member of the
[Trustworthy Systems Group](http://tsg.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/), where I
contributed to research projects that investigated a cross-layer
approach to creating efficient and trustworthy systems. I authored two
papers while in this group: *Defining a Model for Defense-in-Depth* (LAW
2015) and *A Survey of Student-Discovered Bugs and Vulnerability
Disclosure* (CISSE 2015) and coauthored several others. My undergraduate
thesis was a proof-of-concept tool to partially automate cache flushing
attacks, work that was done with Dr. John Aycock.

My main side project right now is my [operating
system](https://github.com/JamesSullivan1/os) which I've been working
on for the past year. The project is in early stages right now and is a
way for me to improve my systems programming abilities. The OS currently
only supports x86 and x86\_64, but I plan to extend support to ARM once
the OS reaches a more stable state.

Outside of all of this, I love to practice martial arts. I've been doing
Wado Ryu Karate for most of my life and hold a 3rd degree black belt
with the JKF Wado-Kai. I have recently taken up Takamura-ha Shindo
Yoshin Ryu, which is a traditional Jujutsu that Wado has roots in.

[Curriculum Vitae]({{ BASE_PATH }}{{site.JB.cv_path}})

Contact
======

### Email
Contact via the below two if you need my Email.

### Twitter
[@\_JSulliv\_](https://www.twitter.com/{{ site.author.twitter}})

### Github
[JamesSullivan1](https://www.github.com/{{ site.author.github}})

### GPG

[GPG key]({{ BASE_PATH }}gpg.html)

